© 2021. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Finance
An Abridged and Simplified Version of the 2021 Budget Statement and Economic Policy
I | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Contact information for follow-up by citizens The 2021 Budget Statement and Economic Policy of the Government of Ghana and the 2021 Citizens’ Budget are available on the internet at: www.mofep.gov.gh
For copies of the Statement, please contact the Public Relations Office of the Ministry of Finance: Public Relations Office New Building Ground Floor Room 001 or 003 P.
Box MB 40 Accra – Ghana Email: info@mofep.gov.gh
Ii | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Contents IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC, MITIGATING MEASURES AND THE
Iii | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget List of Tables:
List of Figures: Figure 1: Summary of Revenue Performance for Jan-Dec 2020 ( in Billions of Figure 2: Summary of Expenditure Performance for Jan-Dec 2020 ( in Billions of
Iv | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
“Now is the time for each and every one of us, irrespective of our political affiliations, to unite, join hands, stand shoulder to shoulder, and work hard to place Ghana where she deserves to be”.
H.E. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo (March 2021- State of the Nation Address)
V | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget MESSAGE FROM THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
The good people of Ghana in December 2020 voted to retain H.E. the President, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo for another term to continue the good work and do more.
The confidence reposed in this Government by our fellow Ghanaians is one we do not take for granted.
The 2021 Budget is a landmark budget that reorganises our public finances to protect lives, revitalise troubled businesses, and consciously focus our energies on building back a better Ghana, post COVID-19. The Budget is anchored on our vision transforming this country and build a self-sustaining economy.
For most part of the first term, we have put the economy back on track, through a series of carefully planned programmes of macroeconomic adjustments, introduced revenue-enhancing measures, implemented growth-inducing interventions, supported the private sector, and rolled out social intervention programmes.
By the end 2019, we were solidly on the path of economic transformation on the back of impressive macroeconomic indicators and international endorsement as a country on the rise, when we were struck by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The devastating impact of this pandemic has been felt by all economies globally, including Ghana.
The outbreak of the Covid-19 Pandemic presented a lot of difficulties which have affected our businesses and daily livelihoods.
Government, however, has noticed with great concern the effect of the pandemic on us as a people and has initiated policies to help revive businesses and bring our lives back to normalcy.
All hope is not lost because we have found new ways of doing things with endless possibilities.
Government is committed to making sure we have a healthy population and as such has arranged for Ghanaians to be vaccinated to ensure that we all stay strong to build the Ghana we wish to see.
We have partnered with you even in the midst of difficulties as part of our development process and have taken bold steps to put our economy back on track to development.
About 1.2 million Ghanaians can now have a better and quality secondary education for life, we have cleaned up the banking sector and most customers have received their savings from the collapsed banks.
Additionally, a vehicle assembling plant has been built and we have seen the first batch of assembled vehicles on our market and roads.
We honestly admit that we faced some challenges as we tried to promote our development goals.
Government is earnestly putting measures in place to solve these problems and bring relief to businesses.
For instance, we rolled-out the GH¢750 million CAP-BuSS Programme in May 2020 and this has provided support to Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (MSMEs) and many others.
Like never before, we are called to join hands and develop our nation by continuing the implementation of the bold initiatives to achieve development for all.
After all, we pledged ourselves to the service of Ghana with all our strength and with all our heart.
May God bless us all.
1 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget INTRODUCTION The 2021 Citizen’s Budget is a summary of what Government achieved in 2020 and how much it’s intends to collect in revenues to implement policies and programmes in 2021. The theme of the 2021 Budget is “Completion, Consolidation, and Continuation”.
This theme is underpinned by the fact that over the years every new Budget invariably contains a host of new projects to be initiated at the expense of ongoing projects.
Not only does this put pressure on our finances, but has also historically resulted in payments arrears, with many contractors not being paid on time for work done.
This raises the overall cost of projects as the deferred payments attract interest cost.
In 2021, Government plans to chart a new direction.
The goal is to bring to an end the culture of unfinished projects by fulfilling commitments to complete existing projects.
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE FOR 2020
Macroeconomic Performance Provisional data on the performance of the economy in 2020 is as follows:
The first nine months of the year recorded an average overall real GDP growth rate of 0.2 percent.
A GDP growth rate of 0.9 percent is expected by the end of the year;
Non-Oil real GDP averaged 0.4 percent growth in the first nine months of the year, and is expected to end the year at 1.6 percent;
End-December inflation was 10.4 percent compared to the revised target of 11.0 percent;
Overall budget deficit on cash basis was 11.7 percent of GDP against a revised target of 11.4 percent of GDP;
The primary balance recorded a deficit of 5.3 percent of GDP against a target deficit of 4.6 percent of GDP; and
Gross International Reserves was US$8.6 billion, the equivalent of 4.1 months of import cover.
2 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget PERFORMANCE OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITUTRE IN 2020 Revenue Performance In the 2020 Budget, Government listed measures to mobilise revenue and grants of GH¢53.7 billion to implement programmes, projects, and policies.
By the end of December 2020, a total of GH¢55.1 billion was generated, exceeding the target by GH¢1.5 billion.
This was mainly due to the strong performance achieved in International Trade taxes resulting from the implementation of the Integrated Customs Management System (ICUMS) that ensured a more efficient management and collection of revenues.
Figure 1 shows revenue performance in various categories in 2020.
Figure 1: Summary of Revenue Performance for Jan-Dec 2020 ( in Billions of Cedis)
Total Revenue & Grants Non-oil Tax Revenue Non-Oil Non-Tax Revenue Oil and Gas Receipt Other Revenue (ESLA & SSNIT to NHIL) Grants Rev. Budget Prov.outturn
3 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Expenditure Performance By end-December 2020, Government had spent a total of GH¢100.1 billion on Expenditures (including arrears clearance), against a target of GH¢97.7 billion.
Interest and Other Expenditure where within target.
All other expenditure items exceeded the 2020 targets, as seen in Figure 2. The high performance in some of the expenditure lines were due to the following, amongst others:
Increased recruitment of health professionals, allowances to frontline health workers, and the increase in the retirement age of military officers under Compensation of Employees;
COVID-19 related spending under the Use of Goods and Services; and
COVID-19 related-infrastructure projects under Capital Expenditure.
It is important to note that Government borrowed an amount of GH¢44.9 billion in addition to the total revenues and grants of GH¢55.1 billion in order to implement planned expenditures in 2020.
Figure 2: Summary of Expenditure Performance for Jan-Dec 2020 ( in Billions of Cedis)
Total Expenditure (incl. arrears… Compensation of Employees Use of Goods and Services Interest Payments Grants to Other Government Units Capital Expenditure Other Expenditure Arrears Discrepancy Prov Outturn Revised Budget
4 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Public Debt Developments for 2020 The debt stock as at end-December 2020 stood at GHȼ291.6 billion (US$50.8 billion), representing 76.1 percent of GDP.
This ratio includes the money Government raised to pay for the financial sector bailout and the energy sector Independent Power Purchase (IPPs) capacity charges.
Without the financial sector bailout, the 2020 debt stock was 71.5 percent of GDP.
The breakdown of the debt stock is as follows:
External debt: GHȼ141.7 billion (US$24.7 billion) representing 48.6 percent of the total debt stock; and
Domestic debt: GHȼ149.8 billion (US$26.1 billion) representing 51.4 percent of the total debt stock.
2021 BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY
Macroeconomic Targets for 2021 Government’s fiscal policies and actions (i.e. tax and decisions on spending) affect economic performance within the medium-term.
The 2021 Budget is underpinned by the following macroeconomic targets or indicators:
Overall Real GDP growth of 5.0 percent;
Non-Oil Real GDP growth of 6.7 percent;
End-December inflation of 8.0 percent;
Fiscal deficit of 9.5 percent of GDP;
Primary deficit of 1.3 percent of GDP; and
Gross International Reserves to cover not less than 4.0 months of imports of goods and services.
Resource Mobilisation for 2021 Government hopes to collect total Revenue and Grants of GH₵72.5 billion for 2021. A breakdown of the projected resources is as shown in the Figure 3:
5 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Figure 3: Summary of Revenue Projections for 2021 (in Billions of Cedis)
REVENUE MEASURES Government has introduced a number of revenue measures in the 2021 Budget to accelerate development and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These revenue measures are as follows:
A COVID-19 Health Levy of a one percentage point increase in the National Health Insurance Levy and a one percentage point increase in the VAT Flat Rate;
A Sanitation and Pollution Levy (SPL) of 10 pesewas on the price per litre of petrol/diesel under the Energy Sector Levies Act (ESLA) to ensure sustainable sanitation management, improve the quality of life, and reduce the number of deaths and diseases from poor sanitation;
An Energy Sector Recovery (Delta Fund) Levy of 20 pesewas per litre on petrol/diesel under the ESLA to pay for capacity charges resulting from Power Purchase Agreements when the plants involved were idle or unutilised;
A financial sector clean-up levy of 5 percent on profit-before-tax of banks to help defray outstanding commitments in the financial sector.
This will be reviewed in 2024; Total Revenue & Grants Tax Revenue Tax Revenue (non-oil) Non-Tax Revenue (non-oil) Oil Revenue Other Revenue (ESLA & SSNIT to NHIL) Grants
6 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Ministry of Finance and Ministry for the Interior to co-supervise the gaming industry and consult with stakeholders to formulate a comprehensive policy to improve revenue mobilisation from gaming activities; and
Review existing road tolls and align them with current market rates and amend the Fees and Charges (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2018 (Act 983) that governs the setting of Rates and Tolls to accommodate an automatic annual adjustment that will be pegged to the previous year’s average annual inflation as published by the Ghana Statistical Service.
Resource Allocation for 2021 Government in 2021 proposes to spend a total amount of GH₵113.8 billion as shown in Figure 4. The deficit of GH₵41.3 billion will be financed by borrowing from the international and domestic markets.
Figure 4: Expenditure Items and their allocations for 2021 ( in Billions of Cedis)
Total Expenditure Compensation Goods & Services Capital Expenditure Interest Payments Grants to Other Govt Units Other Expenditures Arrears Clearance
7 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC, MITIGATING MEASURES AND THE GhanaCARES (OBAATAN PA) PROGRAMME
This section highlights the impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on the global economy in genera,l and Ghana in particular.
It also discusses the measures taken by Government to address and reduce these impacts.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic The COVID-19 pandemic that hit the entire world in the later part of 2019 had a major impact on nearly every household, business, and the economies wolrdwide.
It distorted economic activities, resulting in layoffs, loss of income, and worsened economic prospects.
In addition, over 2.6 million deaths has been recorded globally.
In Ghana, infections increased from a weekly average of 11 persons to a peak of 781 infections in the last week of July 2020, declining to 104 cases in the last week of December 2020. In 2021, a new wave of infection was recorded and this saw an average rise from 99 in the first week of January to 880 by the week of 5th February.
In an effort to contain the virus, Government imposed restrictions on the good people of Ghana and this affected businesses in key sectors of the economy, notably hospitality, agriculture, health, transportation, manufacturing, real estates, financial, and education sectors.
Transport workers, drivers and conductors of “tro-tros”, and other groups in the informal sector who do not have access to social benefits were hard hit by the restrictions imposed.
Although the restrictions were critical in containing the virus, it also led to drastic reduction in the demand for many goods and services.
Compared to our peers in the sub-region, the bold measures taken by the Ghana Government to contain the spread of the virus were lauded by some sections of the International Community, which urged us to do even more.
8 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget As an additional response, Government, with support from the World Bank, developed the US$100 million National COVID- 19 Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) that focused on strengthening the national capacity for surveillance, diagnosis, and case management as anchored on the 3Ts–Testing, Tracing and Treatment.
Government also provided some relief packages in the following areas:
Assisted businesses to retain their workers and support families as they confronted the crisis;
Subsidised the cost of electricity from April to end-December, 2020 and provided food rations to vulnerable groups during the partial lockdown;
Provided 1,827,581 and 917,142 cooked food packs to vulnerable and underprivileged persons within Accra and Kumasi, respectively;
Distributed dry food packages to about families during the period of the partial lockdown in partnership with Faith-Based Organizations;
Free water supplied by Government through the Ghana Water Company Limited to the benefit of 10,125,620 Ghanaians;
Evacuated Ghanaians stranded abroad due to the travel and movement restrictions under the ‘Operation Return Home’ Programme; Ongoing fumigation exercise Free water for all
9 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Implemented the GH¢750 million Coronavirus Alleviation Programme Business Support Scheme (CAP-BuSS) to reduce the impact of the pandemic on Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (MSMEs), and disbursed about GH¢412.88 million to support 277,511 businesses; and
Established COVID-19 National Trust Fund, where GHȼ 57.13 million was mobilised out of which GHȼ45.22 million was utilised as at 31st December, 2020 to provide PPEs and other medical supplies to COVID-19 selected institutions, distribute food items to the aged, vulnerable, and needy persons, provide vehicles to selected COVID-19 Treatment Centres, amongst others.
COVID-19 Support in 2021: Government will roll out the following additional reliefs in 2021 for different sections of the population, especially those hardest hit by the pandemic:
Tax Rebate: Provision of a tax rebate of 30 percent on the income tax due for the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 for companies in the hotels and restaurants, education, arts and entertainment, and travel and tours sectors;
Tax Stamps: Suspension of quarterly income tax instalment payments for the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 for small businesses using the income tax stamp system;
Vehicle Income Tax: Suspension of quarterly instalment payments of the vehicle income tax for the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 for trotros and taxis as part of measures to reduce the cost of transportation; and
Extension of the waiver of interest as incentive for early payment of accumulated tax arrears: A waiver of penalty and interest on accumulated tax arrears up to December 2020 to reduce cash flow challenges for companies and individuals who arrange terms with GRA to pay up the principal by September 2021. Beneficiaries of these reliefs will have to be registered with the Ghana Revenue Authority and must have fulfilled their first quarter tax obligations.
10 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget THE GhanaCARES (OBAATAN PA) PROGRAMME Government launched the Ghana COVID-19 Alleviation and Revitalization of Enterprises Support (Ghana CARES) programme on 20th November 2020, to reduce the impact of the pandemic and provide the framework to recover quickly with a stronger and more resilient economy.
It is, indeed, a bold vehicle to transform Ghana’s economy to a buoyant, industrialised, prosperous, and more resilient one to better address the fundamental needs of all Ghanaians.
Ghana CARES is anchored on rapidly increasing productivity to fasttrack recovery and engender the creation of decent employment.
Through CARES, Government is resolute that economic revitalisation and growth will be driven by productivity and create new and better paying jobs, particularly in the private sector.
The key projects and programmes that will be implemented under the Ghana CARES Programme include:
Supporting commercial farming and attracting educated youth into commercial farming;
Building Ghana’s light manufacturing sector;
Developing engineering/machine tools and ICT/digital economy industries.
Developing Ghana’s Housing & Construction Industry;
Establishing Ghana as a Regional Hub;
Reviewing/improving implementation of Government Flagships and Key Programmes; and
Establishing the Development Bank of Ghana to finance the growth and development agenda under the Ghana CARES Programme.
11 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget SECTORAL DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK This section highlights the performance of the key sectors in 2020, as well as programmes and activities planned for implementation in 2021. These programmes and activities are based primarily on Ghana’s Medium-Term National Development Agenda 2018-2021 and the Ghana Beyond Aid Agenda.
The programmes also aim to attain the objectives under Government’s CARES programme as well as targets arising from our international commitments with regard to the UN Agenda 2030 (SDGs) and African Union Agenda 2063.
MINISTRY OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE Market women selling farm produce
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture continued to roll out activities in the National Agricultural Investment Plan-Investing for Food and Jobs (IFJ, 2018-2021) to reduce poverty and provide decent work through economic growth.
In 2020 Government undertook the following programmes:
1,736,510 farmers benefited from subsidised fertilizers and improved seeds which significantly increased yields on selected crops (e.g. maize), while creating jobs along the commodity value chain;
Procured and distributed 7,500 improved breeding stock of sheep to 750 farmers in the Upper West, Northern, and Oti
12 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Regions, and raised and distributed 30,000 cockerels to 3,000 farmers in the Upper West, Eastern, Ashanti, Northern and Greater Accra Regions;
Procured 531,100 improved breeds of small ruminants, pigs and poultry for distribution to farmers and commenced the construction of 11 livestock housing units and mechanised boreholes for seven livestock breeding stations;
Continued with the construction of various irrigation projects which are at various stages of completion: Tamne Phases I&II— 90 percent and 50 percent, respectively; Mprumem Phase II—95 percent, rehabilitation, modernisation, and expansion of existing schemes at Tono—95 percent, Kpong Irrigation Schemes — 61 percent and Kpong Left Bank Irrigation Project — 72 percent;
Completed small earth dams in the Upper East, Upper West, Northern, and Savannah Regions to provide easy access to water for domestic use and yearround cropping; A farm with an irrigation system
Completed 21 warehouses under the the “One District One Warehouse” programme;
Maintained the farm gate price for cocoa at GH¢7,600 per tonne in 2017/2018 and increased the producer price by 8.42 percent to GH¢8,240 per tonne in the 2018/2019 season to ensure that our cocoa farmers were not worse off because of falling prices on the world market; and
13 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Created 110,000 jobs through the implementation of the various cocoa sector programmes to stem rural-urban migration and improve livelihoods across the country.
Continue the supply of improved seeds and fertilizers to beneficiary farmers in order to ensure sustained increase in yields of maize, rice, soya, sorghum, cowpea, and groundnut, and make the Ghana self-sufficient in food production with enhanced potential for export;
Distribute 531,100 improved breeds of small ruminants, pigs and poultry procured in 2020 to farmers; set up three baling centres; procure 5 million broiler day-old chicks and 20,000 kuroiler birds to farmers at a 50 percent subsidy;
Procure agricultural machinery and equipment worth about US$30 million for distribution to farmers to boost mechanisation development;
Procure 97,000 litres and 14,000 kg of insecticides for control of Fall Army Worm and procure two screen houses, three mass biological rearing facilities, and 3 million parasitoids for the control of Fall Army Worm; and
Train 64 youths in greenhouse technology in Akumadan and Bawjiase.
MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY Government in 2020 implemented a complete and wide ranging Industrial Transformation Programme with components directed towards making Ghana the new manufacturing hub in West Africa and Africa.
In Government undertook the following activities/programmes:
Implementated a total of 232 projects under “1D1F” which are at various stages of execution, out of which 76 are currently in operation and 107 are under construction;
Supported eligible 1D1F companies with investment and credit facilitation, tax and non-tax incentives, and infrastructure-related support such as construction of access roads and water and electricity connection;
Approved a total of GH¢603 million Import Duty Exemptions on capital goods and raw materials for 37 1D1F companies;
14 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Working with 1D1F companies and Participating Financials Institutions (PFIs), secured GH¢2.3 billion of credit disbursements to the companies.
A total of GH¢213 million in interest subsidy support to de-risk lending was paid by Government to the PFIs on behalf of 1D1F companies;
Established 37 Business Resource Centres (BRCs) at the district level in 2020 and they are currently in operation with full deployment of staffing, equipment, and other facilities.
The operation of the 37 BRCs cover about 146 districts.
Construction commenced on 30 additional Business Resource Centres which will bring the total number of BRCs to 67;
Assisted 110 local garment manufacturing companies to enhance their production capacity and were given contracts for the production of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) to combat the COVID-19 Pandemic; and
Produced 19.5 million face masks, 90,000 hospital gowns, 90,000 head covers, and 50,000 medical scrubs in 2020 with fabrics procured from 3 local textile manufacturing companies.
COVID-19 support to revitalise Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (MSMEs)
In 2021, Government will continue with the construction of 107 1D1F companies and commence the construction 49 others.
15 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget MINISTRY OF ENERGY
In an effort to provide safe and reliable supply of energy, Government in 2020:
Completed approximately 98 percent of the 200MW Amandi Power Project and is currently at the last phase of commissioning;
Connected a total of 388 out of 560 communities to the national grid, increasing the National Electricity Access rate from 85.0 percent in January 2020 to 85.2 percent at end-December 2020, with over 10,000 communities so far connected to the national grid Under the Rural Electrification Programme; and
Distributed 1,500 LPG cook stoves under the Rural LPG Promotion Programme.
In 2021, Government will continue to monitor and facilitate the implementation of the following projects:
Complete Phase 1B of the Early Power Project that will bring the installed capacity to 202MW;
Continue the ongoing PPA Renegotiations;
Implement the Pwalugu Multipurpose Dam;
Repair /replace T3 Gas Turbines;
Complete Lot1 (Kumasi-Kintampo component) of the Kumasi- Bolgatanga Transmission Line Project;
Upgrade 161kV Volta-Achimota-Mallam Transmission Line Project; and
Complete the 330kV A4BSP (Pokuase Bulk Supply Point).
16 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget MINISTRY OF HEALTH Ghana Infectious Disease Centre, Accra
As part of Government’s commitment to healthy style of living and promoting wellbeing for all in the prevention and containment of the COVID-19 Pandemic, Government undertook the following measures in 2020:
Initiated the process to construct 101 District Hospitals, 7 Regional Hospitals, and Psychiatric Hospitals, and rehabilitation of Effia-Nkwanta Hospital in pursuit of the Government’s Health infrastructure drive under the Agenda 111 Programme; deployed an Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) eTracker to all 488 ART facilities to improve HIV/AIDS healthcare services, TB eTracker, and procured 2,343 vaccine fridges for distribution across the country in an effort to retool immunisation infrastructure;
Established four Drone Centres namely: GH1 Omenako, GH2 Mpanya, GH3 Vobsi, and GH4 Sefwi to leverage technology to eliminate
A drone delivering emergency medical supplies
17 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget stockouts, cold chain breakages, and accelerate emergency response time in the healthcare delivery system; and
Recruited 58,191 personnel into the various service agencies of the Health sector.
The breakdown is indicated in Table 1:
Table 1: Staff in the Public Health Sector No Permanent Workers No. Recruited in 1. Medical Officers 2. Specialist (Contract) 3. Physician Assistants 4. Nurses (Certificates, Diploma & Degree) Support Staff (Admin.
Managers Cooks Executive Officers etc.) 6. Pharmacists 7. Pharmacy Doctors Allied Health Professionals (Optical, Field, Lab Technicians) TOTAL
No Temporary Workers No. Recruited in House Officers Rotation Nurses House Officers (Pharmacy Doctors) TOTAL
Government completed the following on-going projects:
Staff Housing for four District Hospitals at Twifo-Praso, Tepa, Nsawkaw, and Bekwai;
District Hospitals in Sawla, Tolon, Somanya, Buipe, and Wheta and a Polyclinic in Bamboi; and
Nine CHPS Compounds at Wiaboman―Greater Accra Region, Antwirifo―Bono Region, Kofiasua―Bono Region, Mantewareso Bono―Ahafo Region, Amakyekrom―Bono Region, Mewerenfiwuo―Bono Region, Samproso―Ashanti Region, Koforidua (Near Offinso)―Ashanti Region, and Akaaso―Western Region.
18 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Government also supported 13 public and nine private testing site facilities with scientific equipment to increase COVID-19 testing across the country.
These sites include: Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research (KCCR); National Public Health Reference Laboratory (NPHRL); Veterinary Services Department (VSD) Laboratory; University of Allied Health Sciences (UAHS); Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR); and some private sector operators.
Develop the Health Sector Medium-Term Development plan to guide health sector investment, establish the Ghana Centre for Disease Control (GCDC), and facilitate the passage of a legislative instrument to strengthen the Emergency Response System;
Continue to implement Government’s Health infrastructure drive, including Agenda 111;
Continue with the construction of the following projects: o Koforidua Regional Hospital; o Shama District Hospital; o La General Hospital; o Tema Regional Hospital; o Reconstruction of the Central Medical Store; o Nkoranza District Hospital; and o Accident and Emergency Center at Dormaa Hospital.
Continue the vaccination programme with vaccines received and purchased from various sources, including the COVAX facility, in an effort to slow the pace of COVID-19 infections rate and bring the impact of the pandemic under control.
19 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget MINISTRY OF ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
Pokuase Interchange (Accra Urban Transport Project)
Government maintained its focus on ensuring free movement of people, goods and services through routine and periodic maintenance and minor rehabilitation of roads in 2020 through the following activities, among others:
Routine maintenance activities were carried out on 25,048km of trunk roads, 11,061km of feeder roads, and 5,535km of urban roads;
Periodic maintenance activities comprising re-gravelling/spot improvement, and resealing works were carried out on 62km, 120km, and 1,570km of the trunk, feeder, and urban road networks, respectively, and completed 648km of asphalt overlay works in the following areas listed in Table 2 below: Table 2: List of completed projects REGION AREA Greater Accra Ashongman, Lapaz (Petroleum), Airport Residential Area, Trinity Seminary, Ga Central, Kwashiman-Ofankor, Chapel Street/Link, Dzorwulu, Tema East, Dansoman, East Legon, Tantra Hill, Ga West Roads, Tema, Baatsona, Shiashie, Burma Camp, Roman Ridge, Ofankor.
Eastern Kyebi, Koforidua, Oda, Suhum, Nana Asafo Adjei – Mile 50, Akim Oda
20 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget REGION AREA Upper East Regional Hospital Road, Bolga Western Chapel Hill, Kwesimintim Sawmill, Assakae, New Takoradi, GPHA Quarters Ashanti Tech Jnc – Anloga Jnc, Tafo, Suame, Moshie Zongo, Buokrom, Kwadaso, Bantama, Manhyia, Mampong, Obuasi, Subin Central Winneba (Anglican Church – Copa Jnc.
Rd.), Winneba-Oda Road, Bawjiase Road, Swedru SHS Roads Bono Sunyani, Berekum Volta Hohoe Town Roads, Kpeme Area Roads
Continue with the maintenance of the country’s road assets to protect the huge investment made in road infrastructure and introduce electronic tolling of roads to improve revenue generation into the Road Fund for the maintenance of the road network;
Enforce Axle Load Control to reduce the overall maintenance budget for the road infrastructure; and
Commence works on major pipeline projects listed in Table 3:
Table 3: List of projects PROJECTS SCOPE Construction of Dufor Adidome – Asikuma Junction (39.2km) Road and Asutuare – Aveyime (23.9km) Road including 2 no. interchanges at Dufor Adidome and Asikuma Junction 63.1km and 2No. Interchanges Construction of Bridge over the Volta River at Volivo 1No. Rehabilitation of Tatale-Zabzugu-Yendi-Tamale Road 165.8km Rehabilitation of Zabzugu – Nakpali – Bimbila Road 73.6km Rehabilitation of Dome – Kitase Road 19.5km Design and construction of Buipe, Yapei and Daboya Bridges 3No. Construction of Tema – Aflao Phase1 Road 17km
21 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget PROJECTS SCOPE Construction of Tema Akosombo Road 64.7km Project for Rehabilitation of Assin Praso – Assin Foso Road (N8) – Phase 2 60km Construction of Tema Motorway Roundabout Phase 2 1No. Supply and Installation of bridge components for 50No. steel bridges 50No. Rehabilitation of Kumasi Inner City and Adjacent Street Projects 100km Asphaltic overlay of selected streets in Accra and Tema 100km Rehabilitation and upgrading of selected streets in Tamale & Yendi (Northern Region), Nalerigu, Walewale & Gambaga (North East Region) and Damango (Savannah Region). 100km
Senior High Schools students observing COVID-19 protocols
To provide equitable access to quality education, Government, in
Continued with the development and implementation of the pretertiary standards-based curriculum (SBC) which started in 2017. About 153,000 Kindergarten (KG) to Basic 6 school teachers across the country received the initial training and trained 290 School Improvement Support Officers (SISOs) formerly known
22 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget as Circuit Supervisors to monitor the implementation of the KG to Basic 6 Standard-Based Curriculum;
Assessed and approved a total of 956 textbooks submitted by various publishers in connection with the new curriculum.
The second phase of the Pre-Tertiary Curriculum Review, which is, the Common Core Programme (CCP) Curriculum for Junior and Senior High Schools was approved by Cabinet;
Established 20 new Libraries across the country, increasing the number of public libraries to 90, and renovated 10 Public and 33 Senior High School Libraries to improve literacy and learning outcomes;
Distributed 157,000 Teacher Packs on new curriculum to teachers across the country and trained 4,086 Master, Regional and District level trainers, as well as 152,000 teachers in the new curriculum;
Procured and distributed 840 pickup trucks and 350 buses, and distributed 2,000 motorbikes to Circuit Supervisors to facilitate movement in their line of duty;
Continue with the implementation of the Free SHS Programme, resulting in increase in the total number of beneficiaries from 813,448 in the 2016/2017 academic year to 1,200,580 students in the 2019/2020 academic year; and
Invested in infrastructure to accommodate the increase in demand under the Free SHS programme:
O completed 539 out of a total of 1,119 senior high school infrastructural projects initiated since 2017; and
O completed a total of 28 Community Day Senior High Schools (E-Blocks) under the Secondary Education Improvement Programme (SEIP).
Train 11,997 teachers on the KG-P6 Standard-Based Curriculum and 95,000 teachers on the Common Core Programme (CCP) Curriculum.
Conduct the first National Standard Assessment Test (NSAT) at Primary 2 and 4;
23 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget
Continue with the establishment of nine state-of-the-art TVET Centres of Excellence and Free SHS programme; and
Continue with the construction of 20 STEAM Centres across the country under the Government’s policy to promote Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM).
CONCLUSION In 2021, Government will continue to support the services sector, infrastructural development, agriculture, industry, and entrepreneurship.
We, therefore, call upon all citizens to be actively involved in the nation building agenda as we put our hands to the plough, so that we can happily reap the rewards of our collective toils.
God bless our homeland Ghana!
24 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Glossary (Budget Terminology) 1D1F (One District One Factory): The setting up of factories and industries which, will in turn, move the country towards greater industrialization.
It is aimed at creating more jobs for Ghanaians across the length and breadth of the country.
Accountability: This is when Government is answerable to its citizens by making known its activities and disclosing the results of such actions.
This may include the responsibility for money or other properties that Government holds in trust.
Allocation: The process of sharing or distributing resources amoung Government ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs).
Alleviation: This is the process of making a problem less severe.
BSTEM (Basic Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics): a term used to group together these academic disciplines.
This term is typically used when addressing education policy and curriculum choices in schools to improve competitiveness in science and technology development.
Budget: A budget is a plan that outlines where to get money from and what to spend it on.
For instance, a family can draw up a budget that will show how much money is available and how it should be prioritised for spending (for example, rent, utilities and food).
If more money is needed, the family would need to consider raising more income or taking a loan.
Budget deficit: This occurs when Government expenditure is more than the revenue it mobilises.
Capital Expenditure: This is money spent on major infrastructure projects such as roads, schools, hospitals, bridges, transport, water systems, plant and machinery.
Compensation of Employees: This is made up of wages & salaries and salary-related allowances such as social security, gratuities and pensions paid to public sector workers.
25 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget Development Partners (DPs): This refers to countries and/or organisations that collaborate with developing countries to achieve their developmental goals.
DPs can be multilateral, e.g. International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and African Development Bank (AfDB), or bilateral which consists of individual countries like Germany, United Kingdom, and the United States of America (USA).
End-Year Inflation: The level of inflation experienced in December of the year in consideration.
Expenditure Overrun: This occurs when Government spending exceeds the Budget amount approved by Parliament.
ESLA : Energy Sector Levies Act.
Evacuation: The process of deporting or removing people from a particular place.
FREE SHS: The Free SHS (Free Senior High School) policy is a Government of Ghana initiative introduced by the President Nana Akuffo- Addo administration in September 2017 that guarantees free access to SHS education for any accademically qualified JHS student.
Fiscal Responsibility Act: These are laws that regulate and describes the ability at which Government can balance spending and taxes.
Grants: These are types of financial assistance given to Government by development partners and for which Government does not have to be pay back.
Grants to other Government Units: These constitute transfer payments that are required by law into earmarked funds such as District Assemblies’ Common Fund (DACF), Road Fund, Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETFUND), Petroleum Related Fund and National Health Fund.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP): This refers to the total value of all final demand goods and services produced in the country over a specific time.
Gross International Reserves: This measures a country’s foreign currency ability to buy goods and services from foreign countries over a
26 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget period; it also supports the strength of the local currency in relation to currencies of other nations.
Inflation: The rate of increase in general price level of goods and services over a period.
IPEP (Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme): The Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme (IPEP) is one of the flagship programmes of the NPP Government that aims at eradicating poverty and minimalising inequality, especially in the rural and deprived communities through the provision of basic infrastructure.
Loan Repayment: These are monies paid to countries, banks and other financial institutions who have lent money to Government for development and other projects.
These lenders could be from within or outside the country.
Macroeconomic targets: These are measurements used to access the performance of the economy.
Examples include economic growth, inflation, changes in the level of employment, trade performance with other countries, relative success or failure of Government economic policies and the decisions made by the Bank of Ghana which affects money demand and supply in the economy.
MSME (Micro And Small Buisness Developmet Programme): A microenterprise (or microenterprise) is generally defined as a small business employing a minimum number of people, and having a balance sheet or turnover less than a certain amount Miscellaneous Provision: This is a portion of a contract consisting of diverse sections where all of the random issues are provided.
Mitigating Measures: This is when measures are put inplace to reduce impact from severe issues and occurences.
NABCo (Nation Builders Corps): also known as NABCO is an initiative introduced by the Government of Ghana to provide jobs to unemployed university graduates to solve various social problems in both the private and
27 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget public sectors and build their skills to promote economic growth in the country.
NBSSI (National Board for Small Scale Industries): The National Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI) is a non-profit public sector organisation under the Ministry of Trade and Industry that is mandated to promote the growth and development of Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs).
Non-Oil Real GDP: Is the total output in the economy that excludes the activities in the oil sector, which takes into account the level of inflation.
Non Tax Revenue: Government revenue not generated from taxes.
Examples are fees for granting permit or licenses, user fees and other charges, dividends, and interest.
Outstanding Obligations: The outstanding obligations comprise MDA commitments with the Ministry of Finance as well as outstanding 2016 payments owed to Statutory Funds.
Primary balance : This is the difference between Government revenue and its non-interest expenditure (excluding debt service payments).
This is typically measured as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
PFMRD (Public Financial Management Reforms Project): The development objective of the PFMRP is to improve budget management, financial control, and reporting of the Government of Ghana.
The project will also contribute to enhancing fiscal discipline, strategic allocation of resources, and service delivery efficiency, through strengthened systems and procedures and targeted capacity building.
Projected Growth Rate: How the Ghanaian economy will grow in a year.
PFI: Private Finance Initiative.
Revenue: This is the total amount of money that Government receives for its activities from both domestic and external sources.
RFJ (Rearing For Jobs): a Ghana Government initiative to develop a competitive and more efficient livestock industry that will increase domestic production and reduce importation of livestock products, contribute to
28 | Government of Ghana - 2021 Citizens’ Budget employment creation, and improve livelihoods of livestock value chain actors”.
Social Benefits: Government subsidies paid to utility companies and on petroleum products on behalf of the consuming Ghanaianpublic.
Subsidy: This is a financial relief given by Government to citizens to reduce the burden on them.
Surveillance: The process of critically or intellectually observing an issue.
Transparency: This is when Government provides adequate and timely information about what it is doing to its citizens.
TLM (Teaching And Learning Materials): are any collection of materials, including animate and inanimate objects and human and non-human resources, that a teacher may use in teaching and learning situations to help achieve desired learning objectives and outcomes.
Use of Goods and Services: Amount of money that Government pays for running its operations and for delivering services to the public.
Value Added Tax (VAT): The tax levied as value is added to goods and services at each stage of production.
© 2021. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Finance