An Abridged and Simplified Version of the 2023 Budget Statement and Economic Policy
Addition” ii | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Contact information for follow-up by citizens The 2023 Budget Statement and Economic Policy of the Government and the Citizens’ Budget are available on the internet at: www.mofep.gov.gh
For copies of the Statement, please contact the Public Relations Office of the Ministry of Finance: Public Relations Office New Building Ground Floor Room 001 or 003 P.
Box MB 40 Accra – Ghana Email: info@mofep.gov.gh
Addition” iii | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Table of Contents
Addition” iv | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget
‘’We are currently in a crisis driven by rising fuel prices caused by the rapid loss in value of the local currency, as well as high international crude oil prices.
These factors are eroding the real value of incomes and savings, thus imposing economic hardships on citizens.’’ However, we remain resolute.
Addition” v | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget FOREWORD This year would undoubtedly go down as one of the most challenging in the economic history of our country.
Like the rest of the world, we were hit with the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, which resulted in a slowdown in economic activity, leading to a reduction in our revenues and unbudgeted additional costs associated with fighting the pandemic.
Just when we thought, we were making great strides in our recovery from the damaging effects of the pandemic by the commencement of the implementation of our transformation agenda, we were hit with a variety of events which have over the period, eroded the macroeconomic successes we chalked from 2017 to 2019. First it was the Russia-Ukraine war, then a delay in the passage of key revenue measures in the 2022 budget, which led to credit rating downgrades.
Suddenly, for the first time in ten years, the International Capital Market was closed to us, domestic financing conditions tightened and the cost of borrowing increased, contributing to high debt service and the rapid depreciation of the cedi.
Thus, even as the foreign currency support from the capital market and our foreign earnings declined, the rise in our import bill rose from our apparent insatiable demand for imports as a country, coupled with our increasing debt servicing bill, further undermined the value of our currency.
This has led to a high cost of living for us all, both as Government and as individuals.
Rising fuel prices have led to increases in prices of most goods and services, with inflation at an all high of 40.4% in October 2022.
We have been really tested as a people, and Government empathises greatly with you for the undue pressures this has brought.
We want to express our gratitude as Government to our various stakeholders, including Parliament, Employers’ Associations, Labour Unions, Civil Society, Faith Based Organizations, Association of Ghana Industries, Ghana Union of
Addition” vi | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Traders Association, Academia, Think-Tanks, and the ordinary Ghanaians who continue to bear with us even as we navigate these difficult times.
Nana Addo Danquah Akuffo-Addo, I want to assure all Ghanaians that Government is putting in place polices that will reset the economy and restore macroeconomic stability, raise significant revenues, implement structural and public reforms, expand digital and physical infrastructure, reduce nonessential imports, promote exports, expand local production of import substitute, and protect the vulnerable and socially excluded.
The lessons we have learnt as a country from this period have made it necessary for us to permanently restructure and transform our economy and build resilience.
We will come out of this stronger.
The Lord will uphold us and grant us strength to do this.
Addition” 1 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget INTRODUCTION 1. The 2023 Citizen’s Budget is a summary of what Government achieved in 2022 and how much it intends to collect and utilise its revenues to implement policies and programmes.
The theme of the budget is “Restoring and Sustaining Macroeconomic Stability and Resilience for Inclusive Growth & Value Addition”.
Over the years, every new budget invariably contains a host of new projects to be initiated at the expense of ongoing projects.
This does not only put pressure on our finances but has also historically resulted in payment of arrears which raise the overall cost of projects as the deferred payments attract interest cost.
In 2023, Government will implement new policies and programmes, but will also encourage the culture of completing all existing projects.
Addition” 2 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE FOR 2022
Macroeconomic Performance 4. During the 2022 Mid-Year Fiscal Policy Review, Government set the following macroeconomic targets for 2022: i.
Overall Real GDP growth of 3.7 percent; ii.
Non-Oil Real GDP Growth rate of to 4.3 percent; iii.
End-period inflation of 28.5 percent; iv.
Overall fiscal deficit of 6.6 percent of GDP; v.
Primary surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP; and vi.
Gross International Reserves sufficient to cover at least three and half months of imports of goods and services
Available data on the performance of the economy from Jan-Sept 2022 highlight the continued adverse effect from the challenging global and domestic environment.
These developments have manifested through rapid exchange rate depreciation, high inflation, unsustainable debt service burden, fiscal stress and external sector shocks despite the monetary and fiscal policy interventions instituted by Government.
The provisional economic performance from Jan-Sept 2022 is presented as follows: i.
Real GDP growth averaged 4.0 percent year-on-year for the first half of 2022 compared with 3.9 percent during the same period in 2021; ii.
Headline inflation accelerated to 40.4 percent in October 2022 from 37.2 percent in September and 33.9 percent in August, driven by both food and non-food prices increases; iii.
Overall budget deficit on cash basis was 7.4 percent of GDP against the target of 6.2 percent of GDP, and the
Addition” 3 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget corresponding primary deficit was 2.0 percent of GDP against a target of a deficit of 1 percent of GDP.
A key driver of the cash-basis fiscal deficit is the payment of sizeable outstanding payments from 2021 and earlier years in addition to current year expenses; iv.
The Public Debt-to-GDP ratio stood 75.9 percent at the end of September 2022, down from 76.7 percent at the end of December 2021, mainly due to the impact of the currency depreciation; v.
Gross International Reserves stood at US$6,591.8 million, equivalent to 2.9 months of imports cover at the end of September 2022, down from a stock position of US$9,695.2 million (equivalent to 4.3 months imports cover) at the end of December 2021; and vi.
The Ghana cedi depreciated cumulatively by 54.2 percent against the US Dollar compared to a cumulative depreciation of 4.1 percent at the end of December 2021. Similarly, the Ghana cedi depreciated cumulatively by a 48.5 percent against the British Pound compared to 3.1 percent at the end of December 2021
Addition” 4 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget PERFORMANCE OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE IN 2022 6. The 2022 Mid-Year Fiscal Policy Review revised the 2022 fiscal framework against the background of unfavourable global and domestic developments.
Provisional data on Government fiscal operations for January – September 2022 show shortfalls in revenue performance while expenditures were largely on track vis-à-vis the periodic target.
Revenue Performance 8. Total Revenue and Grants amounted to GH¢65,399 million (11.0 percent of GDP), compared with the target of GH¢67,307 (11.4 percent of GDP) and the GH¢49,108 million (10.7 percent of GDP) recorded in the corresponding period in 2021.
Compared to the target for the period, the outturn for Total Revenue and Grants represented short fall by GH¢1,909 million or 2.8 percent and a year on-year growth of 33.2 percent.
The shortfall in revenue stemmed from the less robust performance recorded in all the revenue types.
The percentage collection of the various revenue types for Jan- Sept 2022 is shown in figure 1.
Addition” 5 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Figure 1: Summary of 2022 Jan-Sept Revenue Performance
Expenditure Performance 11. Total Expenditure (including arrears clearance and discrepancy) for the period amounted to GH¢109,421 million (18.5 percent of GDP), marginally above the target of GH¢103,992 million (17.6 percent of GDP) by 5.2 percent.
The marginal increase in expenditures was largely on account of expenses on Interest Payments and Grants to Other Government Units.
The breakdown of the payment by the various expenditure lines is shown in Figure 2.
Non-Oil Tax Revenue, Non-Oil Non- TaxRevenue Oil and Gas … Other Revenue, Grants, 1%
Addition” 6 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Figure 2: Summary of Jan-Sept 2022 Expenditure Performance Financing Operations 13. Government’s fiscal operations for the period resulted in an overall budget deficit of GH¢44,022 million (7.4% of GDP), against a target of GH¢36,684 million (6.2% of GDP).
The deficit was primarily financed from domestic sources.
Foreign financing for the period amounted to a net repayment of GH¢6,531 million (1.1% of GDP).
Public Debt Developments For 2022 14. Provisional data as at end September 2022 indicate that total gross public debt stood at GH¢467,371.32 million (US$48,871.34 million), representing 75.9 percent of GDP.
This made up of domestic debt of GH¢195,657.61 million, equivalent to 31.8 percent of GDP, whilst external debt was GH¢271,713.71 million, representing 44.1 percent of GDP.
The increase in the domestic debt was an account of rising interest costs, while the growth in the external debt was mainly driven by the depreciation of the local currency.
Compensatio n of Employees Use of Goods and Services Interest Payment Grants to Other Gov't Units Capital Expenditure Other Expenditure Arrears Discrepancy
Addition” 7 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Figure 3: Trends in Public Debt (2018 – September, 2022) Source: Ministry of Finance
2023 Medium-Term Overall Macroeconomic Targets 16. Guided by the medium-term policy objectives, the Government has set following macroeconomic targets for the medium-term i.
Overall Real GDP to grow at an average rate of 4.3 percent; ii.
Non-Oil Real GDP to grow at an average rate of 4.0 percent; iii.
Headline inflation to be within the target band of 8±2 percent; iv.
Primary Balance on Commitment basis to average a surplus 1.3 % of GDP in the 2023-2026 period; and v.
Gross International Reserves to cover at least 4 months of imports.
Based on the overall macroeconomic objectives and the mediumterm targets, the following macroeconomic targets have been set for the 2023 fiscal year: i.
Overall Real GDP growth of 2.8 percent; ii.
Non-Oil Real GDP growth of 3.0 percent; iii.
End-December inflation rate of 18.9 percent;
Addition” 8 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget iv.
Primary Balance on Commitment basis of 0.7% of GDP; and v.
Gross International Reserves to cover not less than 3.3 months of imports of goods and services.
Addition” 9 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 2023 AND MEDIUM-TERM FISCAL FRAMEWORK
Revenue Measures 18. To support the fiscal consolidation process, Government will present revenue measures with an estimated total yield of 1.35 percent of GDP to Parliament for consideration and approval.
These among others are: Revision to the taxation of cigarettes and tobacco products to align with ECOWAS protocols, increase the excise rate for spirits above that of beers.
Increase the Value Added Tax (VAT) rate by two and a half percentage points from 12.5 percent to 15 percent and review the VAT threshold as well as undertake major reforms with respect to VAT exemptions.
Convert the National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy (NFSL) into a Growth and Sustainability Levy (GSL) to cover all entities.
Reduce the Electronic Transfer Levy headline rate from 1.5 percent to one percent of the transaction value alongside the removal of the daily threshold.
Other proposed measures include o Sale of 5G Electromagnetic Spectrum; o Enhance Rent Tax Compliance; o Pursue Additional Oil Entitlement (AEO) in relation to the Jubilee Field; and o Revised Income Tax to exclude unrealised exchange losses from deductions and ensure that realised exchange losses on capital assets are capitalised.
Addition” 10 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Expenditure Measures 19. In addition to the revenue measures, Government proposes the underlisted key expenditure measures to support the fiscal consolidation process.
Double the LEAP payment per beneficiary household from the current Ghs45 per month to GHs90 and increase number of beneficiary households from the current 344,185 households.
These measures will increase the current budget on LEAP from GHs197.5 million in 2022 to GHs395 million; Increase the budget on school feeding caterer payment by additional GHs138 million, Continue with 30% cut in the salaries of the President, Vice President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MMDCEs, and political office holders including those in State-Owned Enterprises; Reduce the threshold on earmarked funds from the current 25 percent of Tax Revenue to 17.5 percent of Tax Revenues; Migrate all earmarked funds onto the GIFMIS platforms and ensure they use the GIFMIS platform to process all their revenue and expenditures transactions to be completed by end of 2023. Place a cap on salary adjustment of SOEs to be lower than negotiated base pay increase on Single Spine Salary Structure for each year;
Resource Mobilisation for 2023 20. In 2023, Government intends to collect Total Revenue and Grants of GH¢143,956 million (18.0% of GDP) and is supported by permanent revenue measures - largely Tax revenue measures amounting to 1.35 percent of GDP.
The total revenue and grants consist of Domestic Revenue of at GH¢141,552 million which represents an annual growth of 46.6
Addition” 11 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget percent over the projected outturn for 2022. Grants payment from Development Partners is estimated at GH¢2,403 million (0.5% of GDP.
Figure 4:Resource Mobilisation for 2023 (in GH¢ Million) Resource Allocation for 2023 22. Total Expenditure (including clearance of Arrears) is projected at GH¢205,431 million (25.6% of GDP).
This estimate shows a shrinkage of 0.3 percentage points of GDP in primary expenditures (commitment basis) compared to the projected outturn in 2022 and a demonstration of Government’s resolve to consolidate its public finances in a credible and sustainable manner.
The details of the 2023 expenditure is summarised in the Figure 5.
Addition” 12 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Figure 5: Resource Allocation for 2023 (in GH¢ Million) Budget Balances and Financing Operations for 2023 23. Based on the estimates for Total Revenue & Grants and Total Expenditure (including arrears clearance), the overall Budget balance is a fiscal deficit of GH¢61,475 million, equivalent to 7.7 percent of GDP.
The corresponding Primary balance in cash-basis is a deficit of GH¢8,925 million, equivalent to 1.1 percent of GDP.
The deficit is expected to be financed from a number of sources including foreign and domestic sources.
Other sources of financing from multilateral and bilateral partners are expected in the context of the IMF programme being negotiated and the implementation of a debt management strategy.
GH¢205,432 GH¢44,990 GH¢8,048 GH¢27,694 GH¢52,550 GH¢30,079 GH¢27,636 GH¢14,435 Total Expenditure Compensation Goods & Services Capital Expenditure Interest Payments Grants to Other Govt Units Other Expenditures Arrears Clearance
Addition” 13 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget SECTORAL DEVELOPMENT AND OUTLOOK 25. This section highlights the performance of government flagship projects in the key sectors in 2022 and planned activities for implementation in 2023.
These programmes and activities are based primarily on Government’s Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework (2022-2026).
The programme aims to attain the objectives under Government CARES Programmes as well as targets arising from our international commitments with regards to the UN Agenda 2030 (SDG’s) and African Union Agenda 2063.
This section highlights the performance of Government in key areas and sectors of the economy in 2022, as well as programmes and activities for implementation in 2023.
Food Security 28. Government in line with its agenda to vary earnings from the Tree Crops subsector provided 2.7 million improved seedlings to farmers during the 2022 cropping season.
29. 120,000-layer birds were procured and distributed to 1,000 female poultry farmers in 9 MMDAs (Savelugu, Sagnarigu, Wa Municipal, Nandom, Sissala East, Krachi East, Nkwanta South, Techiman North and Nkoranza) under the Rearing for Food and Jobs module.
Beneficiaries also received a 120-capacity poultry battery cage to house the birds.
In addition, a total of 3,750 small ruminants were procured and distributed to livestock breeding stations and 45 farmers to strengthen their resilience to shocks from crop failure and maintain households ability to fulfil social obligations
In 2023, Government, will facilitate the production and distribution of 5.65 million high-quality planting materials of
Addition” 14 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget cashew, shea, coconut, oil palm, mango, and rubber to 175,000 tree crop farmers.
Government in 2022, completed 65 warehouses which added 80,000mt to the national grain storage capacity under the “One District One Warehouse” programme to address the persistent problem of post-harvest losses, and secure farmer income.
In 2023, Government will complete Phase III of Tamne Irrigation Project, construct dams at Sunyeri, Tousal/Jeyiri, Tasundo and Gilang and develop irrigable areas at Vunania and Gilang.
Promotion of organic Fertilizer 34. Given the recent disruption in inorganic fertiliser supply chains and sharp increases in prices from the global crisis, Government has increased the quota for organic fertiliser suppliers to cover the shortfall in supply of inorganic fertilisers.
This initiative has improved food production and decreases the threat to food security.
In 2023, Government will facilitate the establishment and expansion of local organic fertilizer production plants with support from the EXIM bank.
In 2022, Government under the Aquaculture for Food and Jobs (AFJ) Programme, constructed 124 holding facilities (108 ponds and 16 cages), provided 17,460 bags of fish feed, as well as stocked ponds and cages with fingerlings to 25 beneficiary institutions and groups.
In addition, 294 beneficiaries were trained in fish farming practices while 408 fish farmers also received training in the formulation and preparation of local fish feed
In 2023, Government will provide 300 earthen ponds, 40 cages and 52 tarpaulin tanks and supply 35,000 bags of fish feed, 3 million tilapia and catfish fingerlings to 50 beneficiary groups.
Addition” 15 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Cocoa Sector 38. Under the cocoa sector, 147,000 jobs were created through the implementation of various programmes such as rehabilitation, replanting, mass spraying, fertilizer application, and mass pruning to direct youthful energies into productive ventures and reduce rural-urban migration.
In 2023, government will continue implementation of these programmes, to create additional jobs and consolidate the already created jobs to lessen the unemployment burden on Government.
Energy 40. In order to reduce transmission and distribution system losses and improve transmission system reliability, the 161kV Volta- Achimota-Mallam Transmission Line Upgrade Project was completed and is in operation.
In line with Government’s vision to achieve universal coverage of electricity by 2024, 157 communities were connected to the national grid as of September 2022, increasing the national electricity access rate from 87.03 percent in 2021 to 88.54 percent.
As part of Government’s strategy to electrify island communities and hard-to-reach areas with renewable energy technologies, civil works on the construction of three mini-grids at Azizkpe, Aflive and Alorkpem Islands in the Ada East District of the Greater Accra Region have been completed.
Addition” 16 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 43. In 2023, Government will work to finalise preparations towards the Accra-Kumasi transmission line, the Western Corridor Transmission Upgrade Project as well as support the "Government Goes Solar" project for implementation.
Government will connect an additional 400 towns under the SHEP- 4, SHEP-5 and Turnkey Projects in 2023 including electrification in selected communities in Ahafo, Ashanti, Bono, Northern, and Upper East Regions.
Government will also commence the deployment of all-in-one solar street lighting in Metropolitan Municipal District Assemblies (MMDAs) across the country.
Employment Drive 45. As at October 2022, the Youth Employment Agency (YEA) had engaged 80,735 beneficiaries under its various modules.
In Government through the National Alternative Employment and Livelihood Programme (NAELP); reclaimed and reforested 645 hectares of degraded lands, and thus, creating over 2,300 direct jobs; and nursed 20 million economic seedlings to support the plantation development programme, creating 80,071 permanent and casual jobs for the youth in Akotom, Adinkra, Techire, Akwatiakwaso, Fufuo and Hohoe.
In 2023, Government will continue to: Reclaim and stabilise 1000 hectares of degraded lands in selected communities, nurse 1 million economic trees such as coconut, oil palm, citrus and mango to support plantation development and re-afforestation; Establish at designated locations 10 seedlings nursery centres thus, creating 100,000 direct jobs; and train 20,000 illegal miners and potential illegal miners, 200 small-scale mining companies in mine health, safety
Addition” 17 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget standard and the use of alternative safer and sustainable methods of ore extraction in small scale mining.
YouStart 48. Government intends to create a minimum of one million jobs for the youth over the period 2022-2025 through the provision of soft loans for the setting-up of youth-led enterprises under the YouStart programme.
The 3-year programme which offers support to youth-led (below the age of 40 years) Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) with services such as capacity building, access to markets, compliance and quality assurance support has been successfully piloted with 70 beneficiaries, with an amount of GH¢1.98 million disbursed.
Government has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Ghana Association of Banks (GAB) and eleven (11) commercial banks for implementation of the YouStart commercial programme.
Consequently, the banks have committed a total of GH¢1.169 billion, which represents 30% of the funding portfolio, for the programme.
Addition” 18 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Green Ghana to address Climate Change 51. In 2022, about 26.55 million seedlings were distributed under the Green Ghana Day initiative out of which 24.44 million seedlings have been planted.
In addition, 12.9 million seedlings, including ofram, emire, wawa, kokrodua, teak, cedrela, gmelina, cassia, eucalyptus and mahogany species were supplied and planted.
Green Ghana Day 52. A total area of 11,692ha forest plantation was established against a revised target of 17,000ha under the National Afforestation Programme.
In 2023, about 20 million seedlings will be planted as part of the Green Ghana Day.
Global warming poses major threats to the world economy given its negative impacts on health, food and directly to the economies of climate vulnerable countries like Ghana.
According to the V20 Loss and Damage Report, Ghana alone lost $15,200,001,695 from 2000 to 2019 to climate change.
Government will continue to pursue the development of droughttolerant crop varieties as an important climate adaptation measure and invest in irrigation infrastructure across the country
Addition” 19 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget as well as encourage diversification into livestock production as a way of increasing incomes and minimising risks arising out of climate-related crop failures.
Water and Sanitation 56. In 2022, the Five Districts Water Supply Scheme in the Volta Region (Phase 3), also known as the STRABAG Water Project which serves Adaklu Anyigbe; Agotime-Ziope; Central Tongu; Ho West and North Tongu Districts is 95 percent complete.
When fully completed, 424 communities and a population of over 234,000 will benefit from the project.
Government continued with the coastal protection works to protect settlements against beach erosion and flooding while protecting lives, livelihood and properties from tidal wave action.
The Dansoman (97%), Komenda (95%), Elmina Phase III (92%), Cape Coast (80%) and Anomabu (75%), Dixcove (40%) Aboadze Phase II (45%) and Ningo-Prampram (50%) coastal protection projects are currently under various stages of completion.
In 2023, Government will continue with the implementation of the ongoing projects and also, commence additional coastal protection works at Blekusu (Phase II), Apam, Axim (Phase II), La and Teshie, Dansoman (Phase II), Shama, Ningo-Prampram (Section 2), Tema New Town, Anloga, Takoradi and Maritime University Coastal Protection Projects.
Addition” 20 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Road Sector 59. In 2022, works on the La Beach Road Project which involves improving capacity along the Accra Tema Beach Road and the construction of a 3-tier interchange at Nungua Barrier are ongoing.
La Beach Road Completion Project
As part of Government efforts to dualise and improve safety along major trunk roads: works have started on the Tema – Aflao and the Tema – Akosombo roads; the rehabilitation of Assin Fosu – Assin Praso road involving the dualisation of 1.2km of Assin Fosu township roads into a 4-lane carriageway; the reconstruction of the railway underpass bridge; and the reconstruction of drainage structures between Assin Fosu and Assin Praso.
Works on Phase II of the Obetsebi Lamptey Circle Interchange and ancillary works are ongoing.
Additionally, with Phase I of the Tema Motorway Roundabout completed, Phase II, which involves the construction of the 3rd tier of the interchange, will commence.
Addition” 21 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget
Obetsebi Lamptey Ph. 2
The Critical Regional and Inter-Regional Road Projects initiated in 2019 are at various stages of completion.
Project Name Region Length (km) Reconstruction of Osiem - Begoro Road - Lot Eastern Upgrading of Golokwati-Wli Road (km10km27) Volta km, Upgrading of Nsuta – Beposo, Lot 3 Ashanti Rehabilitation of Nkonya Wrumpong - Kwamikrom Oti Partial Reconstruction of Bawjiase - Adeiso Central Resealing of Tamale - Salaga Road - Lot 1 Northern
Addition” 22 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 63. Other road projects which have achieved significant progress include:
Project Name Region Length (km) Sept.
Progress Upgrading of Navrongo - Naga Road (km 2.7 - km 42.2) - Lot 1 Upper East Upgrading of Wa-Bulenga-Yaala Road (Km 6.0- km 37.0) - Lot 1 Upper West Upgrading of Salaga - Ekumdipe - Kpandai Road (Km 26.7 - km 45.3) and Kpandai - Nkanchina Road (10.8km) - Lot Northern Upgrading of Yagaba - Mankarigu Road (Km 12.0 - km 24.0) And Upgrading of Mankarigu - Nawuni Road (Km 0.0 – km 17.5) - Lot 4 North East Upgrading of Daboya - Mankarigu Road (Km 30.0 - km 63.1) - Lot 5 Savannah Rehabilitation of Atebubu – Kwame Danso Roads Bono East Upgrading of Anwiankwanta – Obuasi Road Ashanti Upgrading Of Nalerigu – Gbintri Road (Km 6.0 – km 46.0) - Lot 2 North- East Rehabilitation Of New Abirem – Ofoasekuma Road (Km 0.0 - km 33.2) - Lot 2 Eastern Upgrading of Bogoso – Insu Siding-Huni Valley Road - Lot 4 Western Upgrading of Sefwi Wiawso - Akontombra Road (Km 0.0 - km 15.0) - Lot 2 Western North Upgrading of Akrodie - Sayereso Road (Km 0.0 - km 20.0) - Lot 1 Ahafo Upgrading Of Menji – Bui Road (Km 0.0 – km 30.0) - Lot 1 Bono Rehabilitation of selected roads in Greater Accra Greater Accra
Addition” 23 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Education 64. In line with Government’s commitment to ensuring that adequate logistics are available for effective and efficient administration of schools and educational directorates, Government procured and distributed 175 (66-seater) Buses, 71 Pick-Ups and 2 Tractors to Senior High Schools and Technical and Vocational Education and Training Institutes across the country.
In 2022, Government trained 3,724 male and 3,715 female artisans in 29 Community Development and Vocational Technical Institutes to sharpen their technical and vocational skills for employment and job creation opportunities as well as reduce poverty.
Additionally, 248 community educators were trained in community development and social protection at the Rural Development College in Kwaso to help mobilize communities for development activities.
Government in 2023 will train 500 Community Educators in Social Protection and Community Development and develop new training modules on non-farm job opportunities such as soap making, kente weaving and leather works to promote local economic development and income generation.
Health 68. Malaria continues to be amongst the top ten killer diseases in Ghana.
Thus, as part of Government’s efforts to eliminate malaria, an application (LSM Implement app) for mapping and treatment of mosquito breeding sites in the districts has been rolled out.
The Ho Teaching Hospital introduced CT-Scan and endoscopy services and acquired a mobile clinic van to support outreach services.
In 2022, Government completed the following projects: construction of CHPS compounds at Debiso, Nsutam, and Tiawia; a district hospital at Konongo; treatment and holding centres at
Addition” 24 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Aflao, Elubo, Keta, Kumasi South, and Sewua; and Fevers Unit and COVID-19 Isolation Centre at Korle Bu.
In 2023, Government will continue to regularise the exportation of health professionals by concluding on the Memorandum of Understanding between the Governments of Ghana and the United Kingdom.
Government will continue with the establishment of the National Vaccine Institute and Ghana Centre for Disease Control.
Additionally, malaria vaccines will be introduced in 2023 to reduce high mortality rate in the country.
Human Security 72. Government in 2022 recruited 5,000 personnel into the Ghana Police Service as part of its drive to improve manpower of security personnel and contribute towards the maintenance of law and order.
The Service established the Cold Cases Unit at the Criminal Investigations Department (CID), deployed specialised Anti- Armed Robbery Taskforce (AATF), created a Motorbike Patrol Unit in selected major cities, introduced a Police Mounted Squadron and a Canine (K-9) unit for patrols.
These innovations are in line with their mandate to promote internal security in the country. 74. Government continued works on Phase III of the Security Services Housing Programme which comprises the construction of 320 units for the Ghana Police Service at the Ghana National Police Training School, Tesano.
Government through National Disaster Management Organisation (NADMO) supported 15,772 disaster victims.
Addition” 25 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 76. In 2023, the Police Service will undertake the following: establish Formed Police Unit (FPUs) in 16 police regions to ensure effective and efficient public order and crowd control; re-train and retool the existing Crime Combat and Action Units to be proactive in fighting violent crime such as armed robbery; deploy 1,500 men with 100 vehicles to increase patrol duties in the communities and on the highways to curb the rising spate of armed robbery; and expand Traffic Surveillance Centres to all the 18 Police Regions to ensure efficient and effective traffic management to reduce indiscipline and carnage on our roads.
Government will also continue public education campaigns on disaster risk reduction, intensify sensitization programmes on earthquake, strengthen community resilience for early warning by setting up flood information system in selected regions and districts.
Work on the Phase IV of the Security Services Housing Programme will commence in 2023 for the Ghana Prisons Service.
Tourism 79. Government under the Ghana Tourism Authority (GTA) will mount an aggressive awareness programme under its ‘See Ghana, Eat Ghana, Wear Ghana and Feel Ghana’ campaign to encourage patronage of made in Ghana products in the tourism and hospitality industry.
Government will engage with hoteliers and restauranteurs to serve local food and beverages, use local artefacts, furniture and fixtures, in the interior decoration of hospitality outlets in order to reduce the import component of inputs for the operation of businesses in the sector.
Addition” 26 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 81. In line with Government’s policy to promote investments and private sector participation in the development of tourist attraction sites, the GTA will work closely with Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) to provide incentive packages for local and foreign investors.
Export Drive 82. In recent times, Ghana’s heavy dependence on imports has placed a heavy pressure on the Cedi thus creating an unfavourable balance of payments position
Under Phase 2 of Ghana CARES, Government will provide support to the private sector in targeted sectors to accelerate competitive import substitution and export expansion and an enabling environment to support businesses to engage in the production of these products.
Further to this, Government will promote the formation of partnerships with existing and prospective businesses to expand, rehabilitate and establish manufacturing plants targeted at these selected items.
Gender, Children and Social Protection 84. In 2022, Government through the Ghana School Feeding Programme (GSFP) fed 3,620,468 pupils in 10,832 public basic schools with one hot, nutritious meal for every school-going day.
This has resulted in a cumulative increase in enrolment as at 2020/21 academic year, for KG, Primary and JHS has been 118%, 40% and 72% respectively.
Addition” 27 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget 85. Government employed 32,496 caterers and cooks especially women, to improve their income level to take care of their families.
Government further created a ready market for local farmers thereby boosting the local economy.
To achieve the objective of smoothening the daily consumption and nutritional level of extremely poor households, Government paid five cycles of Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) cash grants to 344,389 households.
In 2023, Government will continue to provide one hot, nutritious meal to school pupils on each school-going day.
Government commissioned the Human Trafficking (HT) secretariat and Trauma-Informed Care Center and provided comprehensive trauma-informed care to 24 child, 46 adult female, and 27 adult male victims of human trafficking.
Government will continue to provide comprehensive trauma care to survivors of Human Trafficking and undertake preventive mechanisms against trafficking in persons, community dialogues as well as embark on awareness raising programs to sensitise stakeholders on issues of human trafficking
Addition” 28 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget CONCLUSION 90. In 2023, Government will continue to support the services sector, Infrastructural Development, Agriculture, Industry, and Entrepreneurship.
We therefore call upon citizen’s to be actively involved in the nation building agenda as we put our hands to the plough, so that we can happily reap the rewards of our collective toils.
God Bless Our Homeland Ghana!!!
Addition” 29 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget GLOSSARY (BUDGET TERMINOLOGY) 1D1F (One District, One Factory): The setting up of factories and industries which, will in turn, move the country towards greater industrialization.
It is aimed at creating more jobs for Ghanaians across the length and breadth of the country.
African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA): A market created to eliminate tariffs on intra-Africa trade, making it easier for African businesses to trade within the continent and benefit from the growing African market.
Alleviation: This is the process of making a problem less severe.
Allocation: The process of sharing or distributing resources amoung government agencies and departments.
Ancilliary: Additional or providing additional support or help Apparel: Clothes of a particular type when they are being sold in a shop Balance of Payments: Is a statement of all transactions made between entities in one country and the rest of the world over a defined period, such as a quarter or a year.
Budget: A budget is a plan that outlines where to get money from and what to spend it on.
For instance, a family can draw up a budget that will show how much money is available and how it should be prioritised for spending (for example, rent, utilities and food).
If more money is needed, the family would need to consider raising more income or taking a loan.
Budget Deficit: Occurs when expenditures exceed revenue Canine: Relating to or resembling a dog or dogs.
Capital Expenditure: This is money spent on major infrastructure projects such as roads, schools, hospitals, bridges, transport, water systems, plant and machinery etc. Carriageway: It is the part of a road used by vehicular traffic.
Compensation of Employees: This is made up of salaries and salaryrelated allowances such as social security, gratuities and pensions paid to public sector workers.
Endoscopy: It is a test to look inside your body
Addition” 30 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Debt-to-GDP ratio: It is the ratio of a country's public debt to its gross domestic product.
Depreciation: It is a reduction in the value of an asset over time or a decrease in the value of a currency relative to other currencies Development Partners (DPs): This refers to countries and/or organizations that collaborate with developing countries to achieve their developmental goals.
DPs can be multilateral, e.g. International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, African Development Bank (AfDB) or bilateral which consists of individual countries like Germany, United Kingdom and the United States of America (USA).
End Year Inflation: The level of inflation experienced in December of a year in consideration.
Expenditure Overrun: This occurs when Government spending exceeds the Budget amount approved by Parliament.
EXIM (Export-Import) Bank: Ghana Export-Import Bank (GEXIM) was established by the Ghana Export-Import Bank Act 2016 (Act 911) to support the government of Ghana’s quest for a feasible and sustainable export led economy.
Export Trade Houses (ETH): They are trading houses that provide a service for businesses that want international trade experts to receive or deliver goods or services.
Fiscal Deficit: It reflects the borrowing requirements of the government for financing the expenditure inclusive of interest payments Fiscal Operations: They are accounting and financial reporting, cash management, investments, accounts payable, payroll, fixed assets, internal control, and debt service management Fiscal Policy: It refers to the use of government spending and tax policies to influence economic conditions, especially macroeconomic conditions.
Fiscal Stress: It is a concept that seeks to measure the extent to which a local government is in danger of a fiscal crisis warranting intercession by the State, especially actions that could reduce local control.
FREE SHS: The Free SHS (Free Senior High School) policy is a Government of Ghana initiative introduced by the President Nana Akuffo-Addo administration in September 2017 that guarantees free access to SHS education for any accademically qualified JHS student
Addition” 31 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Ghana Cares: It is a two-phase programme that builds on the immediate actions already taken by Government under the Coronavirus Alleviation Programme (CAP).
Grants: These are types of financial assistance given to Government by development partners and for which Government does not have to be pay back.
Grants to other Government Units: These constitute payments that are required by law such as District Assemblies’ Common Fund (DACF), Road Fund, Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETFUND), Petroleum Related Fund and National Health Fund.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP): This refers to the total value of all final demand goods and services produced in the country over a specific time.
Gross International Reserves: This measures a country’s foreign currency ability to buy goods and services from foreign countries over a period; it also supports the strength of the local currency in relation to currencies of other nations.
Headline Inflation: It is the raw inflation figure reported through the Consumer Price Index (CPI) that is released monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Import Substitution: A strategy that emphasizes the replacement of imports with domestically produced goods, rather than the production of goods for export to encourage the development of domestic industry Inflation: The rate of increase in general price level of goods and services over a period.
Import substitution: A strategy that emphasizes the replacement of imports with domestically produced goods, rather than the production of goods for export to encourage the development of domestic industry Inflation: The rate of increase in general price level of goods and services over a period.
Interest cost: It refers to the cumulative amount of interest a borrower pays on a loan or other debt while it is outstanding.
Interest payments: They are the cost of borrowing money or payment of interest on a loan or mortgage
Addition” 32 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget IPEP (Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme): The Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme (IPEP) is one of the flagship programmes of the NPP Government that aims at eradicating poverty and minimalizing inequality, especially in the rural and deprived communities through the provision of basic infrastructure Macroeconomic targets: These are measurements used to access the performance of the economy.
Examples include economic growth, inflation, changes in the level of employment, trade performance with other countries, relative success or failure of government economic policies and the decisions made by the Bank of Ghana which affects money demand and supply in the economy.
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU): It is a formal agreement that outlines plans for a common line of action between two or more parties.
Module: It is one of a set of separate parts that can be joined together to form a larger Monetary policy: It is the policy adopted by the monetary authority of a nation to control either the interest rate payable for very shortterm borrowing or the money supply, interest rate, to ensure price stability.
MSME (Micro And Small Buisness Developmet Programme): A micro-enterprise (or microenterprise) is generally defined as a small business employing a minimum number of people, and having a balance sheet or turnover less than a certain amount NABCo (Nation Builders Corps): also known as NABCO is an initiative introduced by the Government of Ghana to provide jobs to unemployed university graduates to solve various social problems in both the private and public sectors and build their skills to promote economic growth in the country.
NBSSI (National Board For Small And Medium Scale Industry): The National Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI)
Addition” 33 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget is a non-profit public sector organisation under the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and is mandated to promote the growth and development of Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs).
National Afforestation Programme (NAP): It is an ecological restoration of degraded forests and to develop the forest resources with peoples’ participation, with focus on improvement in livelihoods of the forest-fringe communities, especially the poor.
National Disaster Management Organisation (NADMO): It is the government agency that is responsible for the management of disasters as well as other emergencies in Ghana Non-Oil Real GDP: Is the total output in the economy that excludes the activities in the oil sector, which takes into account the level of inflation Non-Oil Real GDP Growth: It is an indicator that measures the real annual economic growth of all sectors except oil.
Non Tax Revenue: Government revenue not generated from taxes, examples are fees for granting permit or licenses, user fees and other charges.
Outstanding Obligations: The outstanding obligations comprise MDA commitments with the Ministry of Finance as well as outstanding 2016 payments to Statutory Funds.
Outturn: It is the result of a process or sequence of events.
Primary balance : This is the difference between Government revenue and its non interest expenditure (excluding debt Service Payment).
This can be measured as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Primary surplus (deficit): It refers to the component of the fiscal surplus (deficit) that is comprised of current government spending less current income from taxes, and excludes interest paid on government debt.
Addition” 34 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Projected Growth Rate: How the Ghanaian economy will grow in a year.
Real GDP: It is a measure of a country's gross domestic product that has been adjusted for inflation Revenue: This is the total amount of money that Government receives for its activities from both domestic and external sources.
RFJ (Rearing For Food and Jobs): will develop a competitive and more efficient livestock industry, that will increase domestic production, reduce importation of livestock products, contribute to employment creation, and improve livelihoods of livestock value chain actors”.
Sensitization: The quality or condition of responding to certain stimuli in a sensitive manner.
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs): They are nonsubsidiary, independent firms that employ less than a given number of employees Social Benefits: Government pays subsidies to utility companies and on petroleum products on behalf of the public.
Squadron: It is an operational unit in an air force consisting of two or more flights of aircraft and the personnel required to fly them.
Subsidy: This is a financial relief given by government to citizens to reduce the burden on them.
Surveillance: The process of critically or intellectually observing an issue.
Tidal wave: It is an exceptionally large ocean wave, especially one caused by an underwater earthquake or volcanic eruption.
Transparency: This is when Government provides adequate and timely information for its citizens about what it is doing.
Trunk Road: It is a major road, usually connecting two or more cities, ports, airports and other places, which is the recommended route for long-distance and freight traffic.
Addition” 35 | Government of Ghana - 2023 Citizens’ Budget Use of Goods and Services: Amount of money that Government pays for running its operations and for delivering services to the public.
Value Added Tax (VAT): The tax levied as value is added to goods and services at each stage of production.
V20 (Vulnerable Twenty): They are detailed massive economic damage wrought by climate change on the economies representing countries considered the most vulnerable to climate change.
Subsector - an area of economic activity that forms part of one of the larger areas into which the economic activity of a country is divided.
YouStart: It is a vehicle through which Government intends to provide funding and technical support to youth (18-40) and youthled businesses who fall within this category to assist them start, build and grow their own businesses Youth Employment Agency (YEA): The YEA was established under the Youth Employment Act 2015 (Act 887), to oversee the development, coordination, supervision and facilitation of employment for the youth and related matters in Ghana
© 2022. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the Ministry of Finance